1
Compilation of writings
Anuja Shivde
BUTTERFLY
The marks that humans leave on this world are too often scars.
I don’t want to burden
this world with another shadow.
No.I want to leave behind something much more beautiful.
I want to touch lives. I want to touch them the way a butterfly’s wings would - briefly
skim against your skin. For an infinitely small moment that will leave you gasping for
more. That will make you laugh out in wonder. I want to run carefree on the vast fabric
of my time sending ripples that spread smiles. I don’t want to be a part of history
books. I want to be remembered in the bed time stories that my friends will tell their
children to teach them hope. I want to inspire people to live without fear, regret and
expectation. I want to teach the world to be kinder, softer, wilder, more aware of the
beauty that lies in the simplest of actions. I want to live all day, everyday.
* * *

STEP DOWN
Step down from this pedestal you have falsely created for yourself. Gold and silver and
raised platforms never suited you. How can you see through someone else’s eyes when you
are looking down on them? How can you step in someone else’s shoes if you refuse to stand
beside them. Your greatness is for others to perceive, not for yourself to ponder. What
you can do is a gift. Don’t taint it with this false pride. Don’t taint this pure urge
to help with the expectation of returns. You’re not doing them a ’favour’. You’re just
fulfilling your destiny. If you want to be repaid in time, worth, praise, care then
you shouldn’t be doing it in the first place. The intention is just as important as the
action is. Keep your heart and eyes open. Just because you help people doesn’t mean you
can’t hurt people too. You are at times more capable of doing that than others. With
power comes responsibility too. Don’t get carried away. Don’t let the voices around
you drown your inner voice. Your gut may have a lot to say. If only you would wait to
listen. Be sensitive. Be careful. You are handling minds, people, lives. They are
delicate, they can break with a harsh word. A thoughtless action. You may be kind. But
remember you can always be kinder. Step down. Your feet miss the grassy ground.
* * *

YOU HAVE A LOT TO DO
And I am a huge believer in the philosophy that the world may be broken but hope is not
crazy. The power of a kind word or action has a butterfly effect that could change the
world as we know it. You have a beautiful brain. You have the privilege to be able to
hone it. So use it. Just look around you. Every day you will see a hundred problems that
need solving. Just pick the one cause that moves your heart and dedicate your life to
it. Make it your everything, your sense of satisfaction, your legacy. We are not meant
for 9to5 jobs that will only fill our pockets and leave our souls empty. Find something
that makes you find your worth. See.. You have a lot to do. Fly not on water. Fly with
your feet on solid ground.
* * *

2
LOSS, PAIN AND GAIN
I believe that sparks of all kinds are important. Both the ones that light up the sky
and the ones that make it rain. Because two clouds brushing against each other in the
endless sky is a coincidence, a happenstance. And while serendipity could lead to a
perfect alignment of charges to make Zeus’s lightening bolt, rain is just as important
because loss is what teaches us the beauty of gain. And pain is what makes us aware of
the need to change. A streak of lightening can fill the world with wonder, but rain will
help grow flowers, just as the wisdom that loss imparts on us helps us grow stronger.
So let us celebrate the serendipity of our lives and its countless entanglements with
others. Let’s watch lightening with awe but bow our heads in respect for the rain too
because ultimately that is what heals us all.
* * *

THE WIND
Dark, stormy waters greeted my gaze as I peered over the steel railing. My friends
laughed and shared high fives somewhere behind me but I barely looked away. The sea
was capturing my attention in a way it never had before. The ink black churning depths
called to the deepest pits of my mind. My loneliness was drawn towards it and I wondered
fleetingly whether those deadly, finned predators circling beneath felt lonely too.
Murking in still waters, their mere presence driving life away. The vast opennes of
the sea sent a shiver down my spine but a warm flutter of gold caught my attention. The
windwheel clutched tightly in my palm was all but sprinting in an effort to catch up
with the mighty gale. The wind had always been my friend and wind wheels had always
amazed me. They taught me the beauty of motion. The simple truth that stillness could
never be the way of life. That circumstances would always pull and push but spinning in
rhythm with the incessant force of time is what life really is about. I heard someone
call my name - it was time to go home. It had been a nice weekend in Alibaug and we had
opted for a speedboat to take us back- just for the experience. I stepped cautiously
into the small white boat, taking a moment to admire the powerful black engines purring
at the far end. I walked further, unsteadily trying to adjust to the motion of the
boat as it began treading water. The wind had already started picking up as I stumbled
onto a seat clutching the side railing. As the boat hit full speed the wind transformed
from a wailing whistle to a roar in my ear that refused to die. The sleek bow cut
smoothly through tall waves and with every crest and trough, the boat rose and fell.
I heard joyous screams around me but no sound escaped my lips - they were too busy
smiling. Pulled back both by ecstatic joy and the relentless wind. The windwheel was
an indistinguishable blur of gold whistling happily. I closed my eyes against the
onslaught trying to control the overwhelming joy and inexplicable tears threatening to
slip past my lashes. A few escaped though and I almost laughed in wonder as I thought
about those tiny, salty tears merging with the infinite sea. I hummed softly, a tribute
to the wind that had carried away my fears in the midst of the black ocean. Filling
me instead with giddy happiness and quiet strength. When I opened my blurry eyes, I
saw the horizon dotted with brilliant lights. Mumbai- the city of dreams was waiting.
A strange hope sprang within me as I stared ahead. I knew that those angry waves and
life’s rough seas would always try to drag me down. But today i learnt that even the
mighty sea can do nothing to hold back the indomitable wind. The strength of a true free
spirit.
* * *

3
A CITY THAT NEVER SLEEPS
Feels so weird and yet nice in a quiet sort of way.. Spent the last 10 mins looking
out of the window.. Random lights twinkling in the distance.. ITC giving off the soft
incandescent look of a giant cathedral.. Sometimes I forget that I live in Mumbai.. A
city that never sleeps.. So busy in my own little world.. Unaware of what lies beyond
the neverending deadlines, exams and meetings.. It is so easy to forget, isn’t it?That
life is as much in the pause as it is in the play.. That sometimes the most beautiful
thing in the world is the quiet before dawn.. That delicate phase when the day is just
stirring..when the world is stretching and murmuring lightly as the last dregs of sleep
slowly recede.. Its hypnotic tendrils tenderly caressing the minds of millions, imbuing
them with the strength to face the new day.. Feels peaceful and yet awed being awake
and aware of this timeless process.. Feels zen
* * *

THE WIND
Dark, stormy waters greeted my gaze as I peered over the steel railing. My friends
laughed and shared high fives somewhere behind me but I barely looked away. The sea
was capturing my attention in a way it never had before. The ink black churning depths
called to the deepest pits of my mind. My loneliness was drawn towards it and I wondered
fleetingly whether those deadly, finned predators circling beneath felt lonely too.
Murking in still waters, their mere presence driving life away. The vast opennes of
the sea sent a shiver down my spine but a warm flutter of gold caught my attention. The
windwheel clutched tightly in my palm was all but sprinting in an effort to catch up
with the mighty gale. The wind had always been my friend and wind wheels had always
amazed me. They taught me the beauty of motion. The simple truth that stillness could
never be the way of life. That circumstances would always pull and push but spinning in
rhythm with the incessant force of time is what life really is about. I heard someone
call my name - it was time to go home. It had been a nice weekend in Alibaug and we had
opted for a speedboat to take us back- just for the experience. I stepped cautiously
into the small white boat, taking a moment to admire the powerful black engines purring
at the far end. I walked further, unsteadily trying to adjust to the motion of the
boat as it began treading water. The wind had already started picking up as I stumbled
onto a seat clutching the side railing. As the boat hit full speed the wind transformed
from a wailing whistle to a roar in my ear that refused to die. The sleek bow cut
smoothly through tall waves and with every crest and trough, the boat rose and fell.
I heard joyous screams around me but no sound escaped my lips - they were too busy
smiling. Pulled back both by ecstatic joy and the relentless wind. The windwheel was
an indistinguishable blur of gold whistling happily. I closed my eyes against the
onslaught trying to control the overwhelming joy and inexplicable tears threatening to
slip past my lashes. A few escaped though and I almost laughed in wonder as I thought
about those tiny, salty tears merging with the infinite sea. I hummed softly, a tribute
to the wind that had carried away my fears in the midst of the black ocean. Filling
me instead with giddy happiness and quiet strength. When I opened my blurry eyes, I
saw the horizon dotted with brilliant lights. Mumbai- the city of dreams was waiting.
A strange hope sprang within me as I stared ahead. I knew that those angry waves and
life’s rough seas would always try to drag me down. But today i learnt that even the
mighty sea can do nothing to hold back the indomitable wind. The strength of a true free
spirit.
* * *
4
I HAVE BEEN AWAKE FOR SOMETIME NOW
I had told you once and I would like to reemphasize just how much I love waking up before
the rest of the world sometimes. When all is quiet. And light is just peeking at the
doorstep waiting for the world to open its eyes to another day. Today, that light is
further out of reach, hiding behind a pearly white curtain of rain. Il pleut. Outside,
all colours and shapes blur into a soft grey and all sounds are muted by the soft patter
of rain. How l love waking up to that sound. A sound that heralds the morning rain.
Rain that shall never fall onto our vibrant umbrellas. At dawn, that right is reserved
only for the dancing leaves and the hungry ground. For swaying trees and singing birds.
Dawn is for true children of the earth to celebrate the rain while the rest of us lay
cocooned in bed unaware of it all.
* * *
5

Inside my head 

I know I'm in trouble when I start having more conversations in my head than I do with people.
When I'm quiet on the outside. And so full of thoughts at the same time. Broad strokes of colour.
Fleeting in their presence. Dancing in and out of existence.
Grazing the shores of my mind with whisper soft brushes.
They are not always happy thoughts. More often the colours are darker,
storm clouds full of emotion. Heavy with the need to empty.
To fall through the skies and come undone on an outstretched palm.
I know I can let them go. Clear my mind. Go back to the real world.
But on some days I indulge my mind.
Because even sad, they weave the most intricate tapestries in far corners of my soul.
Impossibly beautiful to ignore.
And when I look at the world around me when I feel this way, I look at it differently.
Like every suspended mote of dust is an important detail.
I look for stories in the shadows under my pillow and I find them in the curve of gentle smiles.
There is no order to what I write, it's all over the place.
Just like life is most of the time. There are no revisions, no refinement.
Just raw, uncut emotion that catches words somewhere deep within.
And yet if I pin them down they will crumble.
Like the light of a firefly would dim between closed palms.
Like a wave function would collapse into a particle. So I dare not speak.
And I dare not put those precious lines on paper.
Because when I write in my head I write only for myself.
* * *

Salt

I am a writer. When I bleed into words, the tears stop.
But words are harder to pen down with each passing day.
They don't flow effortlessly the way they used to.
They don't seep into paper and take away the pain.
They don't even soothe the raging tempest of thought that steals my sleep each night.
All they do is echo uselessly against the fragile walls of my tired mind.
My mind was never built for walls.
It was never supposed to be a fortress that could endure and strengthen with hardship.
It was a stream both peaceful and powerful in its inherent flexibility.
But the times have been too hard, too long and too dark.
And now I stand at a precipice and watch as the sea of emotions surrounds me.
The waves threaten to overwhelm me from the slightest crack in those feeble walls.
It's so close.
I can taste the salt on the breeze and then how can I blame the tears when they follow? I miss myself sometimes.
I know that I'm back there somewhere.
But I can't let go yet.
I still have miles to go before I can rest my weary heart.
I have to be strong for a little bit longer.
Patch up the wall as best as I can.
Hold onto that faraway whisper of hope.
All I know is that when I finally bring down the walls I shall meet a different version of myself.
Who knows maybe she'll know how to deal with life better than I do.
Maybe she'll be kinder, braver, softer in the face of suffering.
Maybe she'll look back at these raw desparate words and hear the story they tell.
Maybe she's the hope whispering in my ears telling me that somehow it's all going be okay.
For today though, I'll bleed a little into my words and follow the tears to sleep.
* * *


I was raised by a pair of old fashioned doctors.
The kind that smile when you enter their cabin.
The ones who adhere to the strictest moral code, to the Hippocratic oath we all read out when we started.
They taught me to never take shortcuts in life.
To give more than I take.
To be selfless when it comes to service.
I watched them as I grew up and without even meaning to, they taught me what it meant to be a doctor.
A lot of time has passed since they were in my place, learning the ropes as interns.
The world is different now.
Faster, harsher, colder.
The challenges are different now.
'Internship' in a municipal hospital is a trial by fire.
Especially if you want to secure a place for residency in the exam that will follow.
It is an exercise in finding corners to cut and I struggled everyday with how at odds it was to everything I had been raised to believe.
Here a degree of cunning was a necessity, an ability to escape work, a gift.
'Internship madhe maaf marayla nahi shiknar tar kadhi shiknar?' is what I'd been told.
This concept was foreign enough for me without being thrown into the deep end of a pandemic completely unprepared.
For months I struggled with facing two sides of myself - the one my parents raised, who wanted to genuinely help patients and do good.
And the one that the times needed, who was practical enough to survive the cut throat competition and study.
It's been almost a year since then and I still haven't found a balance.
Someone has been helping me understand though, lately.
I've been working in a covid ward since the past 15 days now, and there is an ajji in my ward.
I collect her blood everyday from the least thrombosed vein I can find.
The first few days she used to curse me and everyone around her.
She used to ask me to let her die.
To stop causing more pain.
I dreaded her name in my collection list.
The last few days though I noticed that she would often call out and ask for water.
There are no relatives in covid wards and seeing her like that broke my heart.
So whenever I could, I would stop my work and pour her a sip or two.
As the days passed she started to struggle less when I came for a collection.
Sometimes I would pat her shoulder after she drank.
Today as I poured water, she spoke to me between sips.
"Tu ahes mhanun me rakta kadu dete.
Baaki konala nahi denar me", she said.
I smiled under my mask.
Then she held the sides of my face through my PPE and said, "Tu majha leki sarkhi ahes.
Tu majhi kalji ghetes".
I adjusted my face shield and the woman in the bed next to her hooked to her own iv line smiled at me.
I poured the last sip and said, " Ho ajji, me tujhi lek ahe, ata lavkar bari ho ani ghari ja." After my collections, I sat in front of the cooler, sweat soaking through my scrubs and I thought about her.
We had all been treating her for covid for 15 days, but all she wanted was a cure for a parched throat.
I know that I might not be the kind of doctor my parents are.
I'll still worry about bond completion and exam dates more.
But maybe, one day, I can become the person they raised me to be.
* * *


When did I forget that I could write for myself?
I use the backspace more than the alphabet these days.
Maybe all the stories that I could have told got lost in the spaces between my words.
When did the memory of me become bigger than the reality of me? When did I start to chip off the bits of me that didn't fit into the image I had of myself in my mind? Who am I really? Who was I? Who will I be? When was I the truest version of myself? Was it the curious bright eye behind a microscope.
Or the adrenaline seeped vein after a hard climb.
Was it the heart that kept breaking only to find love again.
Or the ear that bled with every sad story it heard.
Was it the shoulder that grew weary of the weight of the world.
Or the hand that shook, looking for a pulse.
Why did i keep finding myself only to lose bits and pieces on the way?Memory is such a fickle friend.
An imprint of all I knew burnt into the space between my neurons.
Yet even as I breathe more of me in time more of who I was slips away.
The note of my grandfather's voice.
The colour of my dog's fur.
The poem my friend wrote for me.
I can't remember and it scares me.
The more i feel the more I forget.
I don't want to forget you Neel.
Or all the people I have ever loved.
It's important, vital, to remember every insignificant detail.
The way you smile.
The way you smell.
The weight of your hand on my shoulder.
The way you carved a frame in my heart and refuse to leave.
I am trusting you with my memory.
You will remind me of who I was when I forget.
Like that poem on the first page of our English text book.
Will you do that for me? Remember for me? Remember me?


Today while I waited for my swab report I wondered.
When did I last miss god ? I don't like boxing myself up in categories.
But I don't follow religion the way I was raised to.
For me God is a foreign concept that I've always tried to understand rather than feel and experience.
I approach the concept of God with curiosity and perhaps the lack of faith is what leaves the prayer room empty in my mind.
I don't believe in creation stories.
The science on that is crystal and beautiful in its simplicity.
The question is - Even if I never understand god, do I need one anyways? Not for assigning blame when I fall.
But for hope.
I believe that my life is for me to experience most fully.
So am I missing out on the experience of something deeply satisfying because I refuse to let go of what I know.

Why does the world put so much stock in having a fixed opinion on things?
Why do you have to pick a side on a matter and stick to it all your life?
Why do you have to either be a believer or an atheist?
A leftist or a rightist?
A cat person or a dog person?
To define yourself with these labels. Why is being flexible often equated to being a pushover?
 The beauty of our minds is their ability to change and grow over time.
 Scientific research revels that neuroplasticity is the ability of our neurons to form new synapses.
 We can choose to think differently.
 We can choose to be different people than we were before.
 We have not only the freedom, but also the power to do so.
 But this resistance to change is so deeply ingrained in our upbringing that it is difficult to let go of.
 As children we are taught that exploring different avenues in life is 'unfocused'.
 That stating an opinion and then changing it is 'hypocritical'.
 Instead why don't we teach our children to embrace whoever they are in the present? To grow from who they were in the past.
 And to choose who they will become in the future? The simple realisation that our minds and personalities are not fixed leaves so much scope for possibility in the world.
 For understanding and forgiveness.
 For imagination and growth.
 For rolling stones that just want to rest for a while and gather some moss.
 